---
layout: post
title: Spiritual Healing And Biopsychology
---
The Sanskrit word for human love that emanates from the spiritual heart is called “mamata.” I don’t understand much Sanskrit but I imagine it is related to the word “mama” as the phoneme “ma” is used for “mother” in many languages ​​in the world, and in so many languages ​​derived from Sanskrit in India.

I like the analogy of universal love as the love a mother has for her baby. If a human being, mother or father, or any person really, could love other people’s people as much as their own child (or their closest people in the case of people who do not have children), then that great love could be closer to universal in that such a personal form of love could be expressed in the same intensity for all beings and creatures, not just humans.

We are all progeny of the infinite. Behind all finite conceptions of our relative being there is the infinite witness, which is the same in all. Each mind is an evolutionary effort evolving toward infinite consciousness. The finite and relative mind has its complexes and limitations but it also has the spiritual urge to expand into infinity. We must help everyone return home. With that understanding of the unity of consciousness we can better understand the weaknesses and mistakes of others more easily and feel more compassion for their failures instead of being offended and judging them.

Perhaps this universal love is possible only on a spiritual transcendental plane or by the most spiritually enlightened beings, such as a Buddha or Christ. However, I believe that the practice of thinking that all are progeny of the infinite and within me is the infinite that loves them without discrimination will bring one closer to enlightenment and liberation. This ideation of seeing and loving the infinite in the finite is the most sublime of a human being embodied on earth.

The meditation on the spiritual heart with the “inverted namaskar” posture is a salute to the spiritual heart. The return salute from this nucleus of love is a feeling of grace that connects one with all beings, all of the other rays of light radiating from this nucleus.

Biopsychology And Spiritual Healing

Human life is always at balance between inferiority and superiority complexes. We make so many mistakes based on such complexes, dominating others or submitting to the domination of others. However, one day we have to wake up, have true confidence and be more authentic without these games of inferiority or superiority, without harming others and ourselves.

When one can see ones own mind without negative or positive prejudices or distortions one begins to see ones whole world without these distortions as well. One stops having opinions about other people’s characteristics and can really see what their minds are like with their past and present thoughts and emotions. All that the awakened mind sees are the dynamics of actions and reactions of minds. The previous actions have built a reality in the present and the actions of the present will create a reality for the future. It does not matter if one dies in debt of previous actions because they continue attached to the mind and the soul and seek to be reborn in the human body to pay those debts in another incarnation. Everything that one brings from genetic inheritance and the conditions of the environment of birth have been a result of previous actions, chosen by one. No one is the victim of an arbitrary chance. The conscious Macrocosm does not play dice as humans do. Some say that the soul always chooses its incarnations in the phase between death and rebirth. I think that this is so but also what the conscious macrocosm gives us precisely for balancing our previous actions, whether we want it and accept it or not. All who are incarnated on earth have debts with the universe and will be paid by us. In the end no one escapes the law of compensation, of action and reaction, or karma and samskara.

A yogi once stated that the power of spirit is so real that if one is bit by a poisonous snake but with firm determination says “I am not poisoned” then one will not become sick. Only because something is difficult to understand for the masses does not make it untrue. This yogi understood higher laws but the lot of humanity live in materialistic and deterministic ignorance. The discovery of higher psyco-spiritual laws make so many physical determinants vacuous and vaporous, and make our modern science shallow and our medicine so crude. I have seen so many times how so called incurable diseases like cancer and AIDS have been eradicated by a radical, spiritual change of consciousness. People gained a little bit of spiritual, vertical insight into their illness and understood the deeper reasons and were cured. Perhaps few can comprehend this but that does not make it untrue.

The physical world is a product of Spirit. We create realities based on our limited mental projections and these projections always bounce back as our karmic reactions and such frustrations only serve to strengthen these cognitive barriers. We continue believing that these personal and collective projections are absolute until some great clash awakens our spirit and broadens our mental projections. I am not saying that viruses, deadly illnesses or poisons are not real, only that they exist on a cruder plane of reality. Change the mind and you change the body. Change the mind and you change the world.

The key to a strong immune system is a strong mind. What is immunity but the ability of the organism to distinguish between what is me and what is not me? At the mental level this distinction of self and not self corresponds to moral discernment. One knows who one is and what are one´s personal boundaries. Most people are confused about such questions and simply let others decide what is best for them. They place too much faith in their pastors, their doctors or their favourite authors or even actors. A strong and insightful mind with discernment knows the inner labyrinths of the mind, the weaknesses and pitfalls of the self and therefore self deception is more difficult. So much mental confusion due to self ignorance creates a state of constant tension and stress and the physical immune system is also weakened by this lack of discernment.

Biopsychology is not an abstract and intellectual science for the tantric yogi. It is an intuitive science based on direct experience. One enters into the Anahata Vortex or Heart Chakra and becomes one with the heart of the universe. From this center one connects with the Aerial Factor, the subtle vibrations of prana that radiate through the entire universe. Every human mind is a potential portal for this connection if only the desires of the mind are purified from narrow-mindedness and selfishness. When the mind vibrates with universal love and spiritual union there is a warm glow in the chest. One feels the physical heart very calm and also feels the thymus gland as a very soft radiation of soothing energy. All internal sufferings are healed and the radiation from this mind also affects the Anahata Vortex and the organs corresponding to that vortex in other beings. The yogi becomes first at one with the universe and enters the universal heart and naturally radiates this calm to others.

I have known yogis whose universal love and power of discernment was so strong that they could heal others. Their immunity was so strong that they could take on the weight of others. They were liberated from their own actions and reactions and lived freely united with the divine macrocosm. Some had the ability to heal others spiritually, taking their karmic reactions of others into their own mind so that others can advance on the spiritual path. Although they were saints and had a lot of spiritual grace accompanying them, they had to pay debts as if they were their own debts. Action and reaction are mechanical forces that even God cannot change. God only guides us how to get out of our web of karma and if God himself were to take human form to atone for our reactions, then god would have to pay the debt in flesh and blood as well. My yogi friends suffered a lot doing this work. In fact, they sacrificed their lives so that others could come out of the darkness. Some were stronger and able to move more people while others could only help a few people, but they did so with a force beyond the personal mind, or microcosmic mind. They had the grace to understand and use the forces of the Macrocosmic mind. However, they all suffered personally in this process even though they had the strength and spiritual perspective to endure the pain, not fall, and actually digest and transmute what they took from others. Living and studying with them, I saw this dynamic up close and asked many questions. My first book, A Name To The Nameless, was an attempt to explain the dynamics of the mind from this point of view, albeit abstracted from personal context and explained in the theoretical format of the psychology of tantra yoga. I tried to remove my personal opinions and experiences from the writing and focus on the psychological and spiritual processes of the mind. My purpose was to map the soul and mind to help others understand their patterns of action and reaction, or karma and samskara. My second book, Microvita And Tantra Maya, was more personal, in the first person, writing about personal experiences and my opinions. My third book, Light And Dark Tantra, is about my friends and teachers and the tragedy that happened when they died and their spiritual society lost their benevolent influence.

Facades

Being at one with the universe is mostly a great joy but sometimes it is great suffering. I began to experience tremendous bliss in meditation while I was with my mentor Chidghananda when I was in my early twenties. He told me my experiences were rare and that I would probably never have a normal life again. I did not worry about that as the bliss was so intense that I thought I could dissolve into light at any time. 

Without formally becoming a monk I remained close to a monastic order for several years, practising celibacy and simple living. I slept alone in my own room. Chidghananda always recommended this and I was very sensitive to the vibration of other people.

Soon after this affair, when I was in my early twenties I was diagnosed with some mysterious calcium deposits in my brain. I was referred to a neurologist but never went. I only went for the MRI scan because I had a really good chiropractor who simply wanted to rule out that I had cancer or some other serious issues. This chiropractor was really insightful. He was a hidden psychic and shaman, yet was a certified chiropractor. Most of his patients were probably not aware of the hidden aspects of his work but many people loved him because he was a good care giver and relieved people of their pains. Sometimes, when there was a deeper level of trust, he would speak to people about their existential situation, their emotional issues and life-style issues and offer some good counsel.

He and I became good friends. He helped me go deeply into the my health issue and actually learn from it. He began to talk to me about the subtle side of his work and even disclosed personal issues to me and valued my feedback. It was great to have a friend with such wisdom and experience who opened up to me as a trusted friend. With him I deepened my studies into mind and body medicine. He told me that I must begin to help people by taking steps to become a healer.

By cultivating the right understanding, my headaches became my guide. They were a teacher that showed me what was healthy and balanced as well as unhealthy and imbalanced in my life. I dedicated myself to practicing yoga daily, along with running and meditation. I maintained a healthy diet and a good circle of friends and was content, and so the headaches diminished and I did not even think about the calcium deposit. Whenever the headaches came back I would simply bring myself back to my health and spiritual practices and maintain good company and thus refine my personal practices along with my social and family relations and the headaches would go away. The more I got away from the ambitious yogis the better I felt.

Once, the person who was once known as my work partner, yet before we were together, started healing people in my room and even used my bed for their treatments. A lot of healing occurred but I got very ill. People noticed this and thought we worked well together. Ironically, I came to Mexico to treatments with her to recover from these experiences, however I ended up becoming bound to her more in her healing work. I was being drawn into this work but at the same time was learning ways to do this without becoming ill, and then later confront new healing challenges and become ill again and then find new ways to heal myself. She became a famous healer while I would battle the illnesses. Later I realized this vicious cycle and decided that I needed to leave it because it was really wearing on me.

Only recently, in the past few years, did I learn that some monks spoke with her about teaming up with me to work together in Mexico and connect with her friends on the political left. I always thought that she and I decided this on our own but actually she and some monks had spoken of this years before we got together, before I even really knew her. They gave her the encouragement to convince me.

She later admitted that the monks had contrived the idea of us being a team with the idea that I would see that it was really meant to be and that I should not go against a higher order. I simply saw it as priest craft and manipulation and said that I had my own promises to keep. I had conceded to it as long as I thought I had chosen it freely and there was no manipulation. However, everything changed when I realized the truth and things turned for the worse.

She became jealous of everybody who came near me. I tried to remain in this torturous situation with her for the sake of our social work but it simply became impossible because she tried to keep everybody away from me. I could not see my friends or students because she ran them away from me and told everybody I did not want to see them.

Once there was a young woman with AIDS. She was in the clinic for a few days and interacting with us. She behaved like a perfect lady toward me. I felt really heavy and dirty inside my mind, like I had been living a totally different life than my own. The young woman began to feel better and believed that I was helping her. I personally had very little interaction with her but the healer told her that it was I who was indeed helping her. Later, she was cured and began to change her life-style. On other occasions there were other young women with emotional and sexual problems that affected their internal feminine organs. It was very strange and interesting to see inside of their minds, to resonate with organs that I do not have. Again, I felt a little heavy for a few days but these people always healed and changed their lives. I hardly ever interacted with these people because the work was so heavy and I knew that they had a lot of gratitude and could project a lot of emotional transference toward me. In the beginning the healer always said that I was doing the work of the guru and that I was even the incarnation of Quetzalcoatl! Later, she would become jealous of people`s respect for me and I went from being Quetzalcoatl to Casanova, and instead of healing their internal organs she said I was actually manipulating their external feminine organs.

Also, the situation with a yoga organization that she was involved with started going down quickly. All we encountered were criminal and sexual scandals. She became enraged over this and often her rage carried over to me, and perhaps even all men. I became all the more the playboy in her mind each time she heard of these monastic scandals. Later, when we began to encounter homosexual scandals with the monks, she really lost control. She never expressed hatred toward gays before this but later started to see homosexuals around every corner, and eyed them with hatred. Later, she even said I was a homosexual.

Due to this I was forced to try and understand something I had not given a lot of effort to understanding. I also saw many homosexual expressions as something really imbalanced, however, I really did not see them as so much different than heterosexual hyper sexuality in the form of “free love” and open sexual relationships. Whether heterosexual or homosexual these sexual indulgences always create more suffering than pleasure and cause degeneration. Unlike her, I could not condemn them but I tried to see their higher consciousness beyond their impulses and distortions. One must understand that our social world is degenerated with so much narcissism, hedonism, materialism and hyper sexuality that create so many psychological complexes. Also, I saw that there were more mature and responsible homosexuals that contained their sexual expressions with other homosexuals in a more responsible manner. How could I condemn them if these homosexuals were even more responsible than heterosexuals who practiced the hypocrisy of “free love” and went around harming others with their selfish impulses? Yet on the other hand I cannot assert, as some religious homosexual activist do, that God simply made them that way. I think if God were to create homosexuals or guide evolution creatively, then such a God would have given more appropriate organs for homosexual expressions, especially with male homosexuals who practice sodomy. The anus is simply an excretory organ that is not divinely designed for healthy sexual activity. I certainly believe that divine compassion is for all and that God does not judge anybody for anything, but that homosexuality just like other human mental adjustments and complexes are of our own making, our own history of karmic actions and reactions. God has nothing to do with the creation of homosexuality yet divine compassion can touch and transform all parts of our being.

Also, some of her followers had certain homosexual confusions. I saw them as heterosexuals with slight homosexual tendencies. Intuitionally, I saw their minds had some strong complexes in the second chakra, the svadhistana. I always saw that male homosexuals had two very strong propensities in the svadhistana: lack of confidence and compulsion. These emotional and energetic imbalances distort the svadhistana´s libido, cause the pranic or energetic flow of the mind to move downward (toward the first chakra), and overstimulate the first chakra by creating the confusion that the anus is an erogenous zone. In the case of people with slight homosexual tendencies, they often resolved their homosexual tendencies by seeing these underlying complexes in their minds with the help of meditation, yoga exercises and the study of yogic bio psychology. It certainly was not easy to become aware of such unconscious tendencies rooted in the base of the personality and it was a lot of work on my part to guide them through the process, but I did see that these people eventually became heterosexuals with healthy relationships. This is a process much more refined than the “Pray The Gay Away” dogmas that harmed many people by making them more repressed and guilty about a homosexuality that never disappeared or was successfully transmuted into heterosexuality. I saw that many people could become completely heterosexual by processing their complexes in the svadhistana, but not all.

In short, I always tried to treat homosexuals as I do other people. If they express sexual imbalances then I try not to see it as so different than heterosexual imbalances. If they are more mature, conscious, and responsible I simply recommended monogamy and a mature, compassionate relationship just as I recommend to heterosexuals.

All of these accusations against me were too much to bear. She got the weaker members of our community together to take her side against me, including some of the people whom I had helped with their sexual confusions. Nobody believed what she said about me but still some of them stood beside her. Once, when I briefly left the place they burned my belongings.

A similar situation happened with my first yoga teacher who told people I was the next step in human evolution. He was so proud of being my mentor, the one who discovered and developed me. Later, when I confronted he and his dirty monk friends of being playboys and hypocrites he said that I was an emotionally troubled person! He was a married man and I was simply defending his family from him and the young college girls that he flirted with.

A spiritual person will always maintain close connections with other human beings. However, one must always follow one’s conscience instead of any other influence. One should always maintain one’s independence without being influenced by the will and actions and ideas of others.

I began to learn about microvita, or discarnate spiritual force, with Chidghananda. In the process of healing one may connect with certain microvita in order to get information on how to heal another mind. This information and spiritual force is useful in that the distorted mental patterns that create physical illness do not affect the healer. This is not the same as channelling. Channelling is when one opens one´s mind as a vehicle for discarnate force and one´s will is suspended while the will of the microvita takes temporary control of the mind and body. Channelling is always a dangerous and inferior healing process that eventually creates mental imbalances. A strong healer does not succumb to the “possession” of the spiritual force that helps in the process, nor does the strong healer succumb to the mental patterns that create illness in the mind of the one being healed. Instead, a spiritual healer connects to the information and force of microvita to use it in the process of healing. This proper use of spiritual force helps diminish the influence of the negative patterns of the mind being healed upon the mind of the healer.

Spiritual healing and working with microvita is not so much different in principle than leadership in the mundane social world. A leader must be open and receptive to his or her subordinates. One must be understanding and take into account all opinions. However, a leader must have the strength to make decisions based on a greater discernment and insight that, while being considerate to all opinions, must have the strength to decide and override divergent aims when the decisive moment arrives. A weak leader may be too influenced by all of the voices one hears and cannot make clear decisions because one wants to please everybody and has no strong resolve. Similarly, a weak healer may be overcome by the influences of the infirm mental patterns and may become ill while trying to transmute them. The weak healer may also invoke a discarnate force or microvita to do the healing work through their own mind and body. Ramakrishna made a very relevant analogy when referring to a weak guru as a small serpent trying to swallow a fish but cannot and both the serpent and the fish are stuck in a process of suffering. The serpent cannot swallow and the fish remains squirming in its jaws. A strong guru is one who can swallow it in one bite. After years of working with these heavy energies and her accompanying attacks I was diagnosed with a grave illness. Like my teachers before me who also performed this type of spiritual healing the physical body simply could not endure the intensity. Eventually some organ like the liver or kidneys give out. One either dies continuing the work or heals oneself by entirely renouncing such work. I chose to heal myself, live my life and start a family. I was finally free of her and the ever contriving monks. I have felt that this cycle of my life is pretty much finished and resolved and then an illness manifests. I have never gotten sick or had any diagnosis except for the vague calcium deposits in my brain. After so much healing and almost getting ill myself, I finally got something that could be diagnosed! It was like a bright meteorite burning off all of its mass before disintegrating. An solid piece fell to earth and crashed into my house and left a little damage.

My friend became a channeller. Her information was always surprisingly accurate. She could know secret details about the private lives of her patients. Time and time again she was right on the mark. I believe this worked for her when she was only channelling one strong microvita. However, with time she began to channel other forces. At the same time she became more famous and her ego became too powerful and imperious. Gradually, she began to lose her power and her mental equilibrium. Fortunately, she lost her power before she entirely lost her mind. It is a blessing that the Macrocosm takes occult power away from people when they misuse it.

an extract from<a href="https://williamenck.github.io/assets/English/books/Microvita%20And%20Tantra%20Maya.pdf"> Microvita And Tantra Maya</a>
