---
layout: post
title: Ananda Marga, A Revolution?
---

I came across this photo the other day that I used to have on my blog.  I normally would never make fun of another person`s spelling errors, however this nun was being really immature with these threats.  I thought it was kind of funny and also decided to be immature.  She writes like a Hillbilly and I am "Bill" from Texas so why not have a little fun?  

At first I was not sure why she was threatening me.  Her order does have some assassins and they have really murdered people.  Later, I found out she was angry with me because I shared a link to some original texts of Anandamurti before her organization edited them.  She was threatening to sue me for copyright infringement.  

Some people think I focus more on the misdeeds of the Bengali mafia in Ananda Marga that is prevalent in North and South America, and am somehow partial to another faction of Ananda Marga.  Many people discovered how I wrote about how the leader of the North American movement, Shamitananda, tried to murder his unrequited love, a nun, with cobra venom, and how all of his followers tried to cover up for him.  However, this present critique focuses directly on the mother organization in Ranchi, India.  Manipulating spiritual texts to create imbalances of power for the benefit of the priests is probably the greatest transgression of all of the distortions in all of the Ananda Marga sects.  The following text that I was sharing with the rest of the global A.M. society is what angered our spelling bee champ:

“Ananda Marga does not discriminate between a householder and a sannyasi (monastic renunciant, or "acharya"). The place of a chief or head of family in our Ananda Marga is more important than the place occupied by a Sannyasi, on the understanding that the head of the household does not depend on anyone for support, while the Sannyasi has to depend on others. A householder is like a strong tree that stands by itself, while the Sannyasi is like the vine that wraps around the tree for support. A householder, therefore, deserves more respect than a Sannyasi according to the trend of thought in Ananda Marga. This in itself is a revolutionary idea. No philosopher or thinker, either in the East or in the West, has dared to declare that a householder is worthy of more respect than a hermit or sannyasi. It takes the valor of a revolutionary to say this.”

This portion of “Ananda Marga: A Revolution” was eliminated by the acharyas after Anandamurti left his physical body in 1990. Here Anandamurti clearly expresses the importance of the householder and even more places it above the acharyas (monastics). Ever since it was published for the first time many acaryas were bothered by it but of course dared not show their dissatisfaction with their guru. In 1991 that part of the discourse was removed and the books that still remained and had been published with the full discourse were burned on orders from the highest authorities of Ananda Marga Inc. in India. Some years ago a dedicated scholar discovered that in the editions of 1991 onward the above portion were not published.

These "vines" no longer wrap around the tree for support, rather they are strangling it.  While it is true that these so called sanyassis or acharyas have been involved in all kinds of mafia activities, their greatest crime is to alter the texts of Anandamurti.  One can argue that the mafia activities stray from the true path and those transgressors do not reflect the ideology.  However, to have altered the core texts to their benefit is a crime that cannot be pardoned.  These people think of their guru as some form of divine figure yet they have the audacity to edit his texts!  Certainly, there are innocent monastics who have nothing to do with any of this, yet they still remain within a corrupt hierarchy and keep quiet so as to continue their role in their organization like good little sheep.  Spiritual teachers must be bold and confront the truth impartially instead of making amends with corruption.  How can they teach any truth to another if they participate in great lies and cower before their organizational leaders?  There is no longer any way to trust any of the people dressed in the orange uniforms.  Sometimes I feel great shame to have any connection to any of this debacle, to even mention any of this.  Yet, a little honor returns when remember that there were once great yogis in Ananda Marga and that it is a great ideology and world view with impeccable spiritual practices.  Anandamurti was unparalleled and his legacy must not be tarnished by priests.  

I have heard stories from older and more honest acharyas that Anandamurti had once said that Ananda Marga would eventually no longer have acharyas, that the teachers would eventually be lay people.  Hopefully, that is true.  It is time to compost those rotten oranges. 
