---
layout: post
title: Infinite Gratitude
author: William Enckhausen
published: true
---
For an informed and rational mind it is very difficult to have optimism in these times.  The planet is literally burning up with record breaking droughts, heat waves, flooding and forest fires.  The human social world is on fire with the threat of another world war with the conflict in Ukraine and also with the tensions between China and the West.   And all the while the entire world is slipping into economic recession.  

On the morning before the news of the Russian invasion of Ukraine I had a spiritual experience while waking from sleep.  I felt the kundalini rising up my spine and my sense of self disappeared into a tunnel of light.  I could still feel my physical chest where the kundalini had risen, in the Anahata spiritual heart.  There hardly remained any notion of physical forms, just light and pulsating, flowing energy that radiated through the Anahata out into the entire universe.  It was infinite bliss and if the experience would have continued any longer  I am certain I would have left my physical body once and for all.  My heart was at one with the energetic heart of the Macrocosm.  The only thought and words that came into my mind during this experience were "thank you" repeating over and over again.  I woke up and there was hell on earth:  Russia had invaded Ukraine, there were droughts and floods and heat-waves over the entire planet.  

I recalled my first kundalini experiences that I had in my last year in the university.  I hardly was able to finish my studies due to their intensity.  I lost all interest in worldly pursuits and only wanted to dissolve in the infinite light that I was experiencing.  These awakenings continued for several years with great intensity.  Many of my monastic friends said that I would die before I was 30 or 40 because such experiences take on so far beyond the physical world and the mind immersed in spirit loses parallelism with the body.  Yet I found other adventures to keep me grounded in the world.  

These experiences returned to me again years later while I was in the desert fending off the narcos from our community.  I wrote in the essay, <a href="https://williamenck.github.io/a-requiem"> a-requiem</a>, about how when the narcos came for me one night with a chainsaw outside of my house.  I heard the chainsaw start up but then I started to hear the Om sound with its infinite bliss and the Om sound became so loud it drowned out the sound of the chainsaw.  I entirely forgot about the narcos as I was in a trance for several hours.  When I returned to bodily consciousness I was fine, with all of my limbs still intact!  The kundalini is indeed a divine force, the seed of the Macrocosmic divinity within the human microcosm.  The kundalini created a spiritual shield during those intense years of fighting off the narco assassins. There was death and horror all around but internally everything was in harmony. 

I still am not sure about why these experiences occurred again recently but when news about this hellish world makes me miserable I remember these experiences and never forget the words of Anandamurti which have proven so true time after time:  "The Supreme Consciousness is always with you, even in hell."
