---
layout: post
title: The Fall
tags:  ananda-marga
---
I have never used my writings to promote Ananda Marga.  I wrote about the movement and my brief experiences with them in the 90´s but I always told people it is better not to get close to them.  Although I wrote some positive stories about people associated with A.M. in beginning of the movement, I tried to be clear that those positive influences have been waning for several decades now to the extent that hardly anything good remains.  Still, some people entered searching for the positivity that I wrote about from its early days.  Also, many member whom I do not personally know have contacted me because they follow my blog.  Because I wrote about the inspiration from its past people considered me one of them, somebody on the inside of A.M.  I did not want to delude them and so I never got to close to them.  Very rarely did I ever have any conversations with them via email.  If there were any then they were usually brief and I distanced myself from the movement and said I was but a writer offering my own perspective about my own experiences with some of the crazy dramas I encountered with these crazy people.  And because my recent critiques shift more from the blame on the monastics toward the blame on the guru himself, I know that my arguments will be all the more poignant for my readers inside A.M.  

I have now broken all contact with any followers or contacts with these people, not because of any personal reason but because I do not want to harm or confuse them.  So often they were young people just entering the movement.  They were free to follow the blog but I did not want to be friends with them on Facebook, for example.  On my new Facebook account I do not have many A.M. people, only people I actually know and have or could discuss these issues with them personally.  I knew that if others that I do not actually know followed the logic of my writings then it could destroy their hopes in the spiritual society that they are associating with.  I do not want to influence anybody directly and always suggested that they read my works at their own risk and also tell them that it would not be good for them within their spiritual society to associate with me because my writings on the subject have been very controversial with the monastics who lead the organization.  I only wanted to be sincere and express my point of view and let people make up their own minds.  I was not promoting some other ideology in place of Ananda Marga nor offering myself to them as a teacher.  After explaining my position to them did they rarely ever contact me again.

I think the following extract from this most recent essay will make my position all the more clear:

"However, the point of blame does not lie on the disciples themselves. In the past I blamed the fallen monastics for all of the corruption in Ananda Marga. I even said that they even brought down their own guru with all of their vice. However, if a guru is no longer able to guide his disciples on the right path but instead confuses them and all others by allowing them to continue in immoral activity, then the guru is no longer a guru. He may have started out on the right path and may not have wanted his disciples to do what they did but his inability to stop them indicates that the guru had become invalid and incompetent. He always made people promise to follow the moral code of Yama and Niyama but when he permitted pervasive corruption amongst his closest disciples he committed a great hypocrisy. One cannot blame the great transgressions of the monastics that are mentioned in this essay on the monastics themselves, but on their guru that permitted them to fall without stopping them. How many countless others also fell off the path by these examples with the belief that what they were doing was correct because they were close disciples of the guru? Perhaps this is the key to the curse that plagues his legacy? There is no longer a healthy spiritual vibration in the Ananda Marga community. It is full of lies and pathologies and people suffer greatly. The only happy people are the new people who are not yet aware of what they have gotten themselves into. The older people in the movement who are aware of its history are insecure people trapped in a web of lies. They cannot leave because they have no force of truthfulness in their lives. If only they could have the ideology and the spiritual practices free of the history of Ananda Marga, before the fall of the guru. The essential rot is not with the Hindis or the Bengalis or the corrupt monastics, rather it all stems from the errors of the guru himself because while living and leading the organisation these terrible, immoral activities occurred."

Here is the complete essay, "The Fall," which is a post was originally called "A Disavowal" and has some important new editions.

### The Fall

I was recently forced to disavow some really positive statements I had made about another person.  Although I publicly separated myself from Ananda Marga some time ago I privately told people that there was still somebody trustworthy on the inside, somebody who was still honest and who would not delude others by propagating any falsehoods.  

The reason I disavow my previous recommendation is that a few weeks ago I saw that Dada Iishvarakrsnananda (Dada I.K.) published a eulogy for the famous Ananda Marga mafia man, Karunananda, saying that he was such a great asset to Ananda Marga and the entire planet would miss him. I wrote about my experiences with the gangster pimp Karunananda and the Ananda Marga mafia in <a href="https://williamenck.github.io/the-debate/">“The Debate.”</a>  It is curious that these ordeals occurred while Anandamurti was still living.  The guru claimed to be omniscient by his disciples did not shut down the brothel for the monks nor prohibit counterfeiting money.  It would be an althogher different situation if this had occurred after his death.

I confronted the author of the eulogy because I once knew him well. He said he believed my account about Karunananda but still has the eulogy posted on his timeline. He said he did not know about Karunananda´s criminal acts. Everybody knew about Karunananda, at least the people who were around since the 1970´s and 80´s. How is it possible that when I was 23 years old in 1995 and only involved with Ananda Marga for 2 years that I could find out about Karunananda´s criminal acts from decades ago while senior monks know nothing? People working under Karunanda went to jail and this was a huge scandal in the 80´s that was very well known. These older monks remember this and were in Ananda Marga even before I was born!

Perhaps there were other trust worthy people as well but I knew of only one. I was forced to eat my words but it was a great relief.  It was always a tension to hold somebody in high esteem even though I believed he was still part of a corrupt religious society.  I no longer thought there could be any reform from within their movement yet I still told people who remained within that at least they could ask this respected person for advice or guidance when they were confronted by the terrible confusions that remaining within this society entailed.  It was uncomfortable and duplicitious to say this but I felt that at least I was trying to give them some hope because they were really needed to maintain their unity with this society.  Now all I can say is that I am sorry that this has all happened and I was not more firm to my opinion in the past, when I still defended this person, and although indirectly, Ananda Marga.  All that is left is to go deeper within the spiritual practices and the rational ideas in the philosophy.  This is the true path of bliss and these subtle ideas are not within time and cannot be corrupted.  These practical ideas inspire one to manifest something new and to make existence full of meaning while manifesting this inspiration in time, in human life. 

The author of the eulogy is right, the global society of Ananda Marga will miss their false figure heads. They really have nothing without them. Instead of making sincere efforts for self realization in the present, they love to hear stories about their great departed guru and the lineage of priests. They idolize these priests who manipulate them by giving them their “likes” and comments of “Baba Nam Kevalam,” just like a Hallelujah! I am afraid the religious cult mentality of the movement far stronger than any of the rational fragments that remain.

The monastics always fed us distorted images of themselves as well as their guru.  As they over emphasized their own egos as the messengers of truth, they also exaggerated the <a href="https://williamenck.github.io/a-bridge-to-infinity/">form of the guru by claiming he was some omnipotent and omniscient entity.</a>  Instead of creating a spiritual society based on rational spirituality they have instead created just another religious cult of personality for a person who is no longer living that could possibly keep in check the propagation of his image by others. As Anandamurti himself stated:  "Some consider dharma (the essential teaching) to be the propagation of the greatness of a propounder of a particular doctrine or scripture. This is a totally misconceived idea. Dharma is the cultivation of benevolent intellect for the all-round welfare of all the created beings in the universe." 
 
As far as the older monastics go: the best ones are already dead. The respectable, older ones still living, like Iishvarakrsnananda (Dada I.K.) whom I once recommended, suffer a lot of spiritual dissonance and still try to give people a rosy colored filter of the present with stories from the past. There is very little present activity inspiring anybody and so they tell stories of the glorious past. Unfortunately, they end up being sanctimonious priests who, while doing no direct harm with any negative actions, end up creating a false narrative of the movement with their spin-doctoring. They propagate false ideas that will eventually create delusion and despair in the minds of others.   

However, the point of blame does not lie on the disciples themselves.  In the past I blamed the fallen monastics for all of the corruption in Ananda Marga.  I even said that they even brought down their own guru with all of their vice.  However, if a guru is no longer able to guide his disciples on the right path but instead confuses them and all others by allowing them to continue in immoral activity, then the guru is no longer a guru.  He may have started out on the right path and may not have wanted his disciples to do what they did but his inability to stop them indicates that the guru had become invalid and incompetent.  He always made people promise to follow the moral code of Yama and Niyama but when he permitted pervasive corruption amongst his closest disciples he committed a great hypocrisy.  One cannot blame the great transgressions of the monastics that are mentioned in this essay on the monastics themselves, but on their guru that permitted them to fall without stopping them.  How many countless others also fell off the path by these examples with the belief that what they were doing was correct because they were close disciples of the guru?  Perhaps this is the key to the curse that plagues his legacy?  There is no longer a healthy spiritual vibration in the Ananda Marga community.  It is full of lies and pathologies and people suffer greatly.  The only happy people are the new people who are not yet aware of what they have gotten themselves into.  The older people in the movement who are aware of its history are insecure people trapped in a web of lies.  They cannot leave because they have no force of truthfulness in their lives.  If only they could have the ideology and the spiritual practices free of the history of Ananda Marga, before the fall of the guru.  The essential rot is not with the Hindis or the Bengalis or the corrupt monastics, rather it all stems from the errors of the guru himself because while living and leading the organisation these terrible, immoral activities occurred.   

