---
layout: post
title: The Soul Gazers 
---
an excerpt from [The Liberation Of Desire](https://williamenck.github.io/the-liberation-of-desire)  

Fortunately, as a youth I was taken in and given shelter by some of the purest monastics in the order. My first mentor, whom I have written about in many writings, was considered a great saint and healer. He was a classic “sin eater.” Even though he criticized the corruption he loved everybody and even became ill himself by trying to help and heal those monastics who were falling from the path all around him. In the end these criminals created all sorts of lies about him so as to not have a pure ideal of any monastic hovering over their corrupt conscience. All monastics needed to become dirty in their minds and so that they could have some justification for continuing to fall from their path.  
  
I knew another great healer whom I became very close to. He considered me his spiritual son and it was easy for me to see him as a father figure. I knew he could see right through me but I never felt uncomfortable around him. He was one of the most innocent people I have ever known. One day I asked him about what gives certain people the capacity to read the minds of others. He responded to me with the desire of trying to hide an ability that people would consider very special and so he referred not to his own ability to read minds but instead to the ability of certain monks who can read minds. He said that “yes, sometimes we can read people´s minds. However, with you Westerners it is very complex. We can read your minds and see your thoughts but we have no idea why you think the crazy things that you do.”  
  
I was roaring with laughter at the irony. Here is a man sufficiently intelligent to peer into the soul of another with pure objectivity and compassion but because of the distorted nature of our unnatural and warped thought patterns, he could not understand it all! He was not an unsocial and isolated monk. He really loved to be around people. He watched the news and read magazines. He liked music and literature and even movies if they were not vulgar or violent. For me he was a barometer of spiritual maturity and social correctness. He had never been with a woman yet did not show any fear or repression around women. He was very respectful towards them and was a great friend to my mother.  
  
Years later, after the [Purulia Arms Drop](https://williamenck.github.io/the-debate/) and the FBI classification as a terrorist organization, the movement fell apart completely. They hardly even exist now and most of the time that you hear anything about them it is pure scandal and degeneration. People like my “father” suffered greatly as they carried the spiritual burden of leadership and responsibility. Like Chidghananda, my “father” also became physically ill. Most of the monastics were falling into sexual scandals and had no respect for their vows of monasticism. Instead of being congruent and honest they remained monks so as to continue to feed off of the prestige and respect of others, yet roamed around like titillated tom cats ready to mount anything that moved. I wrote the following essay a few years ago while reflecting on this situation.  
  
"Opus Gei"  
  
As I just wrote, my initial exposure to monasticism was very pure regarding sexuality. There were not so many cases of perversion. Later, after great conflicts that effected the stability of the order, people started getting into scandals. There was no longer so much spiritual inspiration or existential security within the order and people started “falling” into their repressed and distorted instincts. The monastic order was a spiritual society based on the practice of tantra yoga.  
  
In the beginning, before the fall, I could see how the monastic life-style really functioned in a healthy manner. There were some older monks that never seemed to have any sexual tendencies. There were others who struggled but as long as they had a healthy spiritual environment, then they could continue with their efforts in a healthy way, without dangerous repression. And then there were the ones that had very little success in this endeavour. The monastic institution would be better off inspiring them to have family lives instead of trying to force monasticism. Otherwise, their natural, albeit repressed tendencies always lead them into trouble. Naturally, their scandals were heterosexual when they were heterosexuals and homosexual when they were homosexuals. However, there were very few homosexuals in this order when I first entered, probably not higher than the mean. The community did not seem to be a refuge for gays, as some sceptics might argue. However, as time passed and the social solidarity of the monastic society eroded there began to be more sexual scandals, and significantly more homosexual scandals. The middle group of those making a sincere and effective struggle began to slide down into the third group of those that just need to do something else and leave an unhealthy, repressed life-style.    
  
According to a recent article I read in The Guardian citing modern social scientific data, only 7 to 10% of the population have homosexual tendencies. Within this 7 to 10%, only a small percentage of people are completely homosexual (2 or 3% of the general population) while the remaining 5 to 8% only have homosexual tendencies to varying degrees.  
  
If societies of humans have populations with more than 10% homosexuality, I believe we would be seeing an effect of increased homosexuality caused by social conditions instead of natural, innate tendencies. Perhaps some people are born homosexual, while in others homosexuality is socially conditioned. The distinctly high manifestations of homosexuality in one particular society would seem to suggest that certain psycho-social dynamics in that particular society somehow induce homosexual tendencies. Why is there more homosexuality in such a society that there isn’t in general society? What would be the personal and social- psychological conditions that cause such a high rate of homosexuality? The most obvious examples of “false homosexuality,” or homosexuality affecting heterosexuals, is in monastic orders and prisons, which sometimes are not so different. I had always heard such rumours about the clergy of the old Church, but I never knew any of these people or was familiar with Catholicism. Later, I became friends with some more progressive Liberation Theology priests who were more honest about the hypocrisy of the supposed celibates.  There is no spiritual vitality left in the church and most priests are really poorly adjusted people that don’t understand their natural impulses. The Catholic church with dogmatic institutions like their very gay “Opus Dei” have propagated this plague for nearly 2000 years.  
  
When “celibate” priests begin to manifest a sexuality that they themselves consider taboo, then the probability for an inappropriate “scandal” is quite high. I saw that people that really were not gay were later getting involved in gay relationships, both monks and nuns. And because they were not supposed to be sexually active, their sexual activity is not natural and free, but often involved inappropriate, imposed and sometimes even perverse and criminal expressions. This is what I refer to as “Opus Gei,” a dark and dogmatic idea against sexuality that eventually paradoxically binds one deeper into sexuality in ways that are not natural to one’s being and that they really don’t seem happy with. Instead of being celibate, a heterosexual becomes gay; “Opus Gei.” This concept has nothing to do with homophobia, and hopefully people would not use such an argument as a diatribe against homosexuals, but rather against hypocritical priests. Perhaps this notion may help distinguish between more innate forms of homosexuality (people actually born with physical, androgynous bisexuality) and those manifestations of homosexuality that are simply caused by temporary confusion, weakness, psycho-social maladaptation, and social decay. Birds, fishes, and many species of mammals are known to develop homosexual relationships when they were unsuccessful with heterosexual procreation attempts. They tried to be heterosexual but homosexuality was the only option available for them and they settled with it. Is it any different for monks?  

I worked with a partner in the reformation of Ananda Marga when the social situation with the organization started going down quickly.  All we encountered were criminal and sexual scandals.  She became enraged over this and often her rage carried over to me, and perhaps even all men.  I became all the more the playboy in her mind each time she heard of these monastic scandals.  Later, when we began to encounter homosexual scandals with the monks, she really lost control. She never expressed hatred toward gays before this but later started to see homosexuals around every corner, and eyed them with hatred.  Later, she even said I was a homosexual.

Due to this I was forced to try and understand something I had not given a lot of effort to understanding.  I also saw many homosexual expressions as something really imbalanced, however, I really did not see them as so much different than heterosexual hyper sexuality in the form of "free love" and open sexual relationships.  Whether heterosexual or homosexual these sexual indulgences always create more suffering than pleasure and cause degeneration.  Unlike her, I could not condemn them but I tried to see their higher consciousness beyond their impulses and distortions.  One must understand that our social world is degenerated with so much narcissism, hedonism, materialism and hyper sexuality that create so many psychological complexes.  Also, I saw that there were more mature and responsible homosexuals that contained their sexual expressions with other homosexuals in a more responsible manner.  How could I condemn them if these homosexuals were even more responsible than heterosexuals who practiced the hypocrisy of "free love" and went around harming others with their selfish impulses? Yet on the other hand I cannot assert, as some religious homosexual activist do, that God simply made them that way.  I think if God were to create  homosexuals or guide evolution creatively, then such a God would have given more appropriate organs for homosexual expressions, especially with male homosexuals who practice sodomy.  The anus is simply an excretory organ that is not divinely designed for healthy sexual activity.  I certainly believe that divine compassion is for all and that God does not judge anybody for anything, but that homosexuality just like other human mental adjustments and complexes are of our own making, our own history of karmic actions and reactions. God has nothing to do with the creation of homosexuality yet divine compassion can touch and transform all parts of our being. 

Also, some of her followers had certain homosexual confusions.  I saw them as heterosexuals with slight homosexual tendencies.  Intuitionally, I saw their minds had some strong complexes in the second chakra, the svadhistana.  I always saw that male homosexuals had two very strong propensities in the svadhistana:  lack of confidence and compulsion.  These emotional and energetic imbalances distort the svadhistana´s libido, cause the pranic or energetic flow of the mind to move downward (toward the first chakra), and overstimulate the first chakra by creating the confusion that the anus is an erogenous zone.  In the case of people with slight homosexual tendencies, they often resolved their homosexual tendencies by seeing these underlying complexes in their minds with the help of meditation, yoga exercises and the study of yogic bio psychology.  It certainly was not easy to become aware of such unconscious tendencies rooted in the base of the personality and it was a lot of work on my part to guide them through the process, but I did see that these people eventually became heterosexuals with healthy relationships.  This is a process much more refined than the "Pray The Gay Away" dogmas that harmed many people by making them more repressed and guilty about a homosexuality that never disappeared or was successfully transmuted into heterosexuality.  I saw that many people could become completely heterosexual by processing their complexes in the svadhistana, but not all.  

In short, I always tried to treat homosexuals as I do other people.  If they express sexual imbalances then I try not to see it as so different than heterosexual imbalances.  If they are more mature, conscious, and responsible I simply recommended monogamy and a mature, compassionate relationship just as I recommend to heterosexuals.  

Once there was a young woman with AIDS.  She was in the clinic for a few days and interacting with us.  She behaved like a perfect lady toward me.  I felt really heavy and dirty inside my mind, like I had been living a totally different life than my own.  The young woman began to feel better and believed that I was helping her.  I personally had very little interaction with her but the healer told her that it was I who was indeed helping her.  Later, she was cured and began to change her life-style.  On other occasions there were other young women with emotional and sexual problems that affected their internal feminine organs.  It was very strange and interesting to see inside of their minds, to resonate with organs that I do not have.  Again, I felt a little heavy for a few days but these people always healed and changed their lives.  I hardly ever interacted with these people because the work was so heavy and I knew that they had a lot of gratitude and could project a lot of emotional transference toward me.  In the beginning the healer always said that I was doing the  work of the guru and that I was even the incarnation of Quetzalcoatl!  Later, she would become jealous of people`s respect for me and I went from being Quetzalcoatl to Casanova, and instead of healing their internal organs she said I was actually manipulating their external feminine organs.  

All of these accusations against me were too much to bear.  She got the weaker members of our community together to take her side against me, including some of the people whom I had helped with their sexual confusions.  Nobody believed what she said about me but still some of them stood beside her.  Once, when I briefly left the place they burned my belongings. 

A similar situation happened with my first yoga teacher who told people I was the next step in human evolution. He was so proud of being my mentor, the one who discovered and developed me. Later, when I confronted he and his dirty monk friends of being playboys and hypocrites he said that I was an emotionally troubled person!  He was a married man and I was simply defending his family from him and the young college girls that he flirted with.  

A spiritual person will always maintain close connections with other human beings.  However, one must always follow one's conscience instead of any other influence.  One should always maintain one's independence without being influenced by the will and actions and ideas of others.

I began to learn about microvita, or discarnate spiritual force, with Chidghananda.  In the process of healing one may connect with certain microvita in order to get information on how to heal another mind.  This information and spiritual force is useful in that the distorted mental patterns that create physical illness do not affect the healer.  This is not the same as channelling.  Channelling is when one opens one´s mind as a vehicle for discarnate force and one´s will is suspended while the will of the microvita takes temporary control of the mind and body.  Channelling is always a dangerous and inferior healing process that eventually creates mental imbalances.  A strong healer does not succumb to the "possession" of the spiritual force that helps in the process, nor does the strong healer succumb to the mental patterns that create illness in the mind of the one being healed.  Instead, a spiritual healer connects to the information and force of microvita to use it in the process of healing.  This proper use of spiritual force helps diminish the influence of the negative patterns of the mind being healed upon the mind of the healer.   

Spiritual healing and working with microvita is not so much different in principle than leadership in the mundane social world.  A leader must be open and receptive to his or her subordinates.  One must be understanding and take into account all opinions.  However, a leader must have the strength to make decisions based on a greater discernment and insight that, while being considerate to all opinions, must have the strength to decide and override divergent aims when the decisive moment arrives.  A weak leader may be too influenced by all of the voices one hears and cannot make clear decisions because one wants to please everybody and has no strong resolve.  Similarly, a weak healer may be overcome by the influences of the infirm mental patterns and may become ill while trying to transmute them.  The weak healer may also invoke a discarnate force or microvita to do the healing work through their own mind and body.  Ramakrishna made a very relevant analogy when referring to a weak guru as a small serpent trying to swallow a fish but cannot and both the serpent and the fish are stuck in a process of suffering.  The serpent cannot swallow and the fish remains squirming in its jaws.  A strong guru is one who can swallow it in one bite.  After years of working with these heavy energies and her accompanying attacks I was diagnosed with cancer.  Like my teachers before me who also performed this type of spiritual healing the physical body simply could not endure the intensity.  Eventually some organ like the liver or kidneys give out.  One either dies continuing the work or heals oneself by entirely renouncing such work.  I chose to heal myself, live my life and start a family.  I was finally free of her and the ever contriving monks. I have felt that this cycle of my life is pretty much finished and resolved and then an illness manifests. I have never gotten sick or had any diagnosis except for the vague calcium deposits in my brain. After so much healing and almost getting ill myself, I finally got something that could be diagnosed! It was like a bright meteorite burning off all of its mass before disintegrating. An solid piece fell to earth and crashed into my house and left a little damage.
  
Sexual Tantra -excerpt from A Name To The Nameless  
  
When speaking about the second, or svadhistana vortex, most people immediately think of sexuality.  The six vrttis or vortexes of the svadhistana vortex are indifference, depression, compulsion, lack of confidence, paranoia, and resentment.  These 6 tendencies have more to do with a lack of sound grounding in one's person rather than sexuality.  The sexual drive is rooted in the sensory mind, in the first vortex.  The problem is that due to a lack of awareness of one's emotional and physical needs, the sexual desire often gets confounded with these defense mechanisms.  
      
It is quite natural and healthy that the sex instinct of the sensory mind finds higher expressions in higher centers.  In a balanced second vortex the sex drive hasn't reached its full maturity but still is not a blind animal instinct.  It has more to do with emotional security, which is the constant theme when discussing the svadhistana vortex.  The problem is that this biological instinct gets tangled up in the distortions and insecurities of the svadhistana, self-conceptual mind. The ego begins to exploit this gratification for its unconscious necessities and there is always suffering and degeneration.  
      
I have never taken the so-called “sexual tantra” seriously.  Firstly, because the only people who I have ever known to practice such things were never really balanced.  Sure, they spoke of awareness and love and transmutation and all of those nice things, but it was just all too obvious that they were just sex addicts propelled by unconscious emotions.  They always left a trail of harm.  It may be that there were once some more conscious practices that really didn't trap people into their compulsions, but if they were in fact truthful, then would have to be based on yama and niyama, the ethical base for the practice of yoga.  Most sexual relations ultimately lead one to suffering.  It is a transgression of ahimsa, or no-violence, to project one's selfish urges onto another.  It is no wonder that in the 2 languages that I understand, the crude word for the sexual act can be  synonymous with the words cheating, deceiving, or generally harming another.  
  
The only functional sexual tantra that I have ever known is to first be responsible and never try to harm anyone while at the same time make the indefatigable effort to try and understand the propensities of the second vortex.  The sexual distortions exploit these fundamental vrttis.  The more suffering, separation, and insecurity that there is in the svadhistana level, the more likely that sexuality will try and compensate for these emotions.    However, these necessities are valid and are so profound and fundamental to the personality that they really need to be understood.  Perhaps the blind compulsions are due to an untimely withdrawal of a mother's breast that left one sucking in nothingness.  Or perhaps sexuality has aligned itself with an inner, unconscious resentment and lack of confidence that tries to outwardly seduce and dominate through sexual dominance, games, or manipulation.  
  
I have come to think that when there is no suffering, there is no desire, and where there is no desire, there is no suffering.  This is true for all desires, not just sex.  Few people can really understand this.  Ramakrishna once said that mundane pleasure is like a dog chewing a sharp bone and doesn't realize the “satiation” of this desire comes from its own blood.  It is fear and insecurity that keep us bound into the limitation of a separate self, and therefore bound to selfish desires.  Sometimes, even very highly developed minds overlook these underlying reverberations in the shadows of the emotions.  The pirates to our present state of bliss are often something unseen from our past.  I have found that the study of the vrttis, especially those of the svadhistana, are paramount for finding the psychological balance that permits intuitive, spiritual development.  
  
  
an excerpt from [The Liberation Of Desire](https://williamenck.github.io/the-liberation-of-desire)  

  

