---
layout: post
title: A Disavowal
tags:  ananda-marga
---

I was recently forced to disavow some really positive statements I had made about another person.  Although I publicly separated myself from Ananda Marga some time ago I privately told people that there was still somebody trustworthy on the inside, somebody who was still honest and who would not delude others by propagating any falsehoods.  Perhaps there were other trust worthy people as well but I knew of only one. I was forced to eat my words but it was a great relief.  It was always a tension to hold somebody in high esteem even though I believed he was still part of a corrupt, criminal society.  I no longer thought there could be any reform from within their movement yet I still told people who remained within that at least they could ask this respected person for advice or guidance when they were confronted by the terrible confusions that remaining within this society entailed.  It was uncomfortable and duplicitious to say this but I felt that at least I was trying to give them some hope because they were really needed to maintain their unity with this society.  Now all I can say is that I am sorry that this has all happened and I was not more firm to my opinion in the past, when I still defended this person, and although indirectly, Ananda Marga.  All that is left is to go deeper within the spiritual practices and the rational ideas in the philosophy.  This is the true path of bliss and these subtle ideas are not within time and cannot be corrupted.  These practical ideas inspire one to manifest something new and to make existence full of meaning while manifesting this inspiration in time, in human life. 

The corrupt, old monastics always fed us distorted images of themselves as well as their guru.  As they over emphasized their own egos as the messengers of truth, they also exaggerated the <a href="https://williamenck.github.io/a-bridge-to-infinity/">form of the guru by claiming he was some omnipotent and omniscient entity.</a>  As Anandamurti himself stated:  "Some consider dharma (the essential teaching) to be the propagation of the greatness of a propounder of a particular doctrine or scripture. This is a totally misconceived idea. Dharma is the cultivation of benevolent intellect for the all-round welfare of all the created beings in the universe." 
 
As far as the older monastics go: the best ones are already dead. The respectable, older ones still living, like Iishvarakrsnananda (Dada I.K.) whom I once recommended, suffer a lot of spiritual dissonance and still try to give people a rosy colored filter of the present with stories from the past. There is very little present activity inspiring anybody and so they tell stories of the glorious past. Unfortunately, they end up being sanctimonious priests who, while doing no direct harm with any negative actions, end up creating a false narrative of the movement with their spin-doctoring. They propagate false ideas that will eventually create delusion and despair in the minds of others.   The reason I disavow my previous statements is that a few weeks ago I saw that Dada I.K. published a eulogy for the famous Ananda Marga mafia man, Karunananda, saying that he was such a great asset to Ananda Marga and the entire planet would miss him. I wrote about my experiences with the gangster pimp Karunananda and the Ananda Marga mafia in <a href="https://williamenck.github.io/the-debate/">“The Debate.”</a>  

I confronted the author of the eulogy, Dada I.K., because I once knew him well. He said he believed my account about Karunananda but still has the eulogy posted on his timeline. He said he did not know about Karunananda´s criminal acts. Everybody knew about Karunananda, at least the people who were around since the 1970´s and 80´s. How is it possible that when I was 23 years old in 1995 and only involved with A.M. for 2 years that I could find out about Karunananda´s criminal acts from decades ago while senior monks know nothing? People working under Karunanda went to jail and this was a huge scandal in the 80´s that was very well known. These older monks remember this and were in A.M. even before I was born!

The author of the eulogy is right, the global society of Ananda Marga will miss their false figure heads. They really have nothing without them. Instead of making sincere efforts for self realization in the present, they love to hear stories about their great departed guru and the lineage of priests. They idolize these priests who manipulate them by giving them their “likes” and comments of “Baba Nam Kevalam,” just like a Hallelujah! I am afraid the religious cult mentality of the movement far stronger than any of the rational fragments that remain.
