---
published: true
---
## Two Israelis Under The Atman


There was a short period in which I would leave my abode in the desert and make short trips.  Mostly I met indigenous people while visiting their communities, but also people from many places in the world.  I was once in San Cristobal De Las Casas, Chiapas.  A friend had referred two young Israeli men to me because she thought they would like to talk to me about meditation and yoga.  

They had just finished the compulsory military tour of duties.  They were in Gaza during one of the most violent periods around ten or twelve years ago.  Any world traveler comes across Israeli soldiers who are traveling the world after they are discharged.  They are so often traumatized and looking for ways to anesthetize their pain with drugs and alcohol or some other escape.  Sure, there were some who found more healthy ways of escape by simply traveling and seeing the world but it was all too common to find circles of ex soldiers living in some place like India where hash or heroin was really cheap and one could live for years with scant savings after military service.  

The two young men I met were very special.  They were traveling, had been to Africa and South America and were now in Mexico.  They had already passed through the scenes of raves, alcohol and ecstasy but were still unsatisfied and looking for something more. They smoked some weed and enjoyed some novel reflections on life before being haunted by violent memories that no substance could quell. They told me they were looking for a shaman to give them ayahuascar or peyote.  

One of them was very cool and calm.  It surprised me to see that he had such peace in him after I later heard what he had been through.  The other was more expressive and outgoing.  He had a certain intensity about him but had an extremely sharp mind that he could withdraw from its intensity to reflect upon deep ideas.  He told me very clearly that they had tried everything they thought could help them but simply have not found an escape.....They must find some sort of escape.

The vocal one told me that he was in Gaza just a few months before our meeting.  He told me that he had to confront some Palestinian militants who were using a small child as a shield.  They pointed a weapon at the Israeli soldiers while holding a child in front of them so that the soldiers would not shoot them.  I did not ask him what he did nor did he tell me.  He said the Palestinians were terrorists.  His friend interjected and said that they had really given them no other choice, that his country´s political policies creates terrorism. They were also terrorist, he said.   

I told them that I was also from an imperialist, terrorist culture.  The United States used slaves to build the country while killing off the indigenous people.  I would feel terrible shame if I had any national pride or waved a flag. Being a human was so much more than all of those lies and those morons who believed in such things were really not yet humans.  This is the planet of the apes, I said, and then apologized to the apes for the insult of bringing them down to our level.  

I responded to him by saying they want to escape into something that they do not have in order to get rid of what they have.  I said maybe you can find something that you already have to help you git rid of what you do not want.  They both followed me and knew I was speaking of something spiritual.  The outspoken one said with desperate intensity, "How?, Where is it?  
It is closer to you than your deepest thought or your most traumatic memory, I responded.  I spoke of the Witness of the mind that is always consciously present and aware of the mind in an eternal presence.  It is with us in heaven and hell, in joy and suffering.  It is above the activities of the mind but always attracts it toward its higher essence where all of the relative doubts and suffering can find relief, can find a meaning and reason.  You just have to find a way to still the mind to see that your awareness just is, that it continues even when you are not thinking or feeling or acting.  It is a joyful experience and if you experience it just a little the mind finds some happiness, a little bit of light begins to creep into its labyrinths and whispers a few secrets and inspirations of how to heal.  

The calm one sat there so calm like he already knew this.  The other one vocalized and conceptualized it a little.  "Yes, it is always there and never changes...I know it is there but it is too easy to forget and I do not know how to get back...is this where we were or where we came from when we were children?"

The Atman is the ground of our awareness.  It is like the electricity passing through a series of different bulbs.  The light might be white, yellow, or blue, may be a disco ball or a lava lamp, but no matter what form the outlet expressing it has, it is always the same electricity enlightening all.  It is one struggle to see it in oneself, but an even greater struggle to see it in others, especially those who are perceived to be the enemy.  To find some common ground in the social and relative world between rivals is peace.  But what if those social negotiations also recognized a deeper common ground?  Would there be a god of Israel, a god of Islam, or the god of the Christians to impede our essential union?

Enter text in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/). Use the toolbar above, or click the **?** button for formatting help.
