---
layout: post
title: Castration Anxiety - An Edition To "El Misterio"
---
An Edition To <a href="https://williamenck.github.io/el-misterio/">"El Misterio."</a>

Spiritual practice with yogic meditation depends so much upon understanding yoga psychology which also includes bio-psychology.  Bio-psychology in this sense is understanding how the non material mind acts in synchronicity with the material body.  It is not just the abstract understanding of how the mind connects with the glands and organs of the body but rather a practical understanding of this science with the end of bringing tranquility to the mind.  In order to calm the mind it is necessary to confront one´s bio-psychological complexes, the unconscious drives and impulses that affect one´s peace of mind.  Meditation is not an escape from these complexes.  Meditation is the cure for all existential complexes.  In the beginning of this process the mind is working more with biological desires and fundamental existential issues like self worth and establishing a positive self image by keeping the mind in a healthy and balanced state that is full of purpose and meaning.  Without confronting the blind impulses one remains stuck in them and adjusts life according to their governance, which in the end is but "a raging bundle of desire in a dying animal."  

Instead of studying biology or endocrinology a yogi uses the mind to consciously reflect upon the body.  Mental blockages also have bio-psychological "energetic" blocks which can be understood and also acted upon by the contemplative mind.  According to yoga psychology the mind uses the brain as its seat and moves throughout the central nervous system.  It has several nexus with the physical body in places where the nervous system branches out of the spinal column to control the glands and organs of the body.  Traditionally, these centers have been called "chakras."  Yogis consider them whirling vortexes of subtle energy that the concentrated mind can perceive and feel and even influence with concentrated thinking and imagination.  I prefer to call these centers "vortexes" because the word chakra now has so many flaky new age dogmas attached to it.  I wrote "A Name To The Nameless" as an attempt to explain my understanding of these centers and how to develop the mind body system in the practice of yogic mediation.  

Understanding sexuality is essential to peace of mind and spiritual development.  Human psychological issues are rooted in our relationship with other people and we seek to have deeper relationships with other humans the more we grow and develop.  Of course when there is a sexual element in these relationships they become all the more complex.  

Modern biology has a developed understanding of how testosterone effects brain development.  Not only is it responsible for sexual desires but it is also related to aggression.  Yoga psychology recognizes this as well but also proposes that a properly balanced second "chakra" or  "svadhistana" vortex (which corresponds to the genital organs) also helps one develop the foundations of self confidence and rationality.  A balanced second vortex (svadhistana means self-establishment) expresses balanced sexuality and with self confidence and rationality established within the personality there is less need of the self defense mechanism of aggression.  An imbalanced second chakra is fixated on sexuality with all kinds of psychological complexes propelling sexual behavior.  Sometimes people use sex to cover insecurities or express aggression and domination while others are ignorant of other pleasures and indulge in sexuality as if it were the only true desire in life.  The imbalanced second chakra is the root of machismo or toxic masculinity.  Only humans who do the work of deep self reflection and take moral responsibility for their blind impulses can make any spiritual advancement.  The reason why spirituality is so rare on the planet is because most people still have not resolved their fundamental sexual and self confidence issues.  

I already wrote A Name To The Nameless as a theoretical structure.  When I think of that old work I often relate those ideas with the life I have lived and the people whom I have met since then.  A friend once suggested that I write a practical commentary for this theoretical work.  Maybe this is the beginning of the endeavor?

Revisiting the second or "svadhistana" vortex reminds me of how I once knew an educated young man who thought my neutered donkey who still chased around the lady donkeys might have miraculously grown a new pair.  He had very high qualifications while he was in high school and so I thought he was joking but he actually believed it.  I told him to examine the donkey and see if he could find the new pair.  Obviously, he could not, but he said that perhaps some pieces of his testicles maintained within.  I mockingly said that perhaps he originally really had three jewels and the veterinarian with his preconceived ideas only removed two and one actually remained to continue fueling those wild donkey desires.  He said "maybe so." Such was his desperation to affirm his belief in some transcendental reality where miracles are possible.  He was an attractive young man with a lovable personality but he struggled to find a girl friend.  I knew he had romantic longings but something inside of him either shut out or was afraid of expressing himself and his feelings toward women.  

I always suspected that his issues were related with what Sigmund Freud called "castration anxiety," the anxiety and fear of what will happen to him if he becomes vulnerable by letting this inner part of him out into some form of expression.  Castration is symbolic of having your desires cut off from full expression by the fear of rejection.  I think his fanciful ideas were fueled by his sexual repressions.  Some very potent and valid need inside of him needed to mature so as to liberate his mind from this tension so that his rationality could develop more completely so that the head and heart are equally balanced.   His wild ideas only became more sound and grounded when he found a companion years later.  In the beginning of his awakening I could see an animal desire awakening within him and instead of being timid he became a little too cocky and assertive.  The animal was reconciling itself with the human.  Fortunately, love was governing his development and these expressions seemed to be just and adjustment to some newly awakened force within him.  
People have so many wishes with biases and preconceived conceptions and seek to have them affirmed by outside sources, whether they are UFOs, conspiracy theories, or somebody who believes in X-File cases of miraculous donkey testicle regrowth.  With irrationality the mind is desperately trying to impose some kind of meaningful order upon the inner chaos of uncertainty and self doubt.  Anything that contradicts these biases are simply ignored.  Sometimes they are laughable cases and seem innocent and harmless.  But what happens when this fantasy bias is transferred into other aspects of existence, into one´s religious or political beliefs, motivating one to rally behind some politician, believe in conspiracy theories, or affirm a belief in some god and scriptures?  This is where comedy becomes tragedy and where depth psychology is necessary as a tool to help humanity discover what forces actually guide our minds.  

Is the same structure of irrational belief behind the casting of the vote or one´s attendance in church?  The difference is just a difference in degree and not in kind.  People from the Heaven´s Gate cult were all well educated computer programmers.  They could perform complex logical cognitive activities by maintaining computer systems while at the same time follow a nut case guru that convinced them to castrate themselves and commit collective suicide before being beamed up into a passing comet!  I suspect that even the most elaborate belief systems have something of this biased fantasy element to some degree or another and that only existential insecurity and a lack of confidence in oneself (a castrated confidence) maintain them.  And for so long do we keep the flame of hope glowing through all of the scandals and contradictions that emerge from these bio-psychological projections.
