---
layout: post
title: Back From The Dead
tags:  ananda-marga
---

My friend Dharma once told me of how a yogi neurologist discovered some new psychoactive medication and started doing laboratory experiments on his friends.  They had a team of doctors as well as yogis and psychics who could supposedly see the kundalini rising, which this doctor believed was facilitated by this new drug.  The kundalini is a spiritual force said to be lying dormant at the base of the spine like a coiled snake.  Meditation awakens the kundalini through the spinal column and brings mystical experiences.  The higher the kundalini rises through the spinal column the deeper the spiritual experience.  Finally, it arrives to the crown of the head where one is united with the Supreme Consciousness.  He told me that most people cried and felt bliss and saw how their lives were now more complete.  The psychic said they had their kundalini awakened just to the second chakra.  Their trips lasted only briefly.  When it came time for my friend's dose, he immediately saw everything go dark.  He entered deep inside of himself and said that he saw all of his complexes and was terrified.  He wanted to see more because he knew it was all true but it startled him.  He remained unconscious for half an hour.  Nobody else had become unconscious.  The psychic said that his kundalini was awakened into the heart chakra, much higher than with the others who only felt a little bliss with a superficial awakening.  After this experience with my friend Dharma, the doctor got scared and stopped his experiments.  I understood how my friend was a little more prepared than the rest for a deep vision.  Those who pass through deeper and dark labyrinths within later receive more light to fill those spaces.

He was a little older than my father.  He had passed through some really tough lessons in his life in the 60's and suffered many losses afterward.  He was from the Bay Area and said his friend G. was the first hippie to ever exist.  It was 1964 and this man grew his hair out and started a gardening company called "Flower Power" with a volkswagon van and female workers.  Everybody though he was crazy because there was yet no social reference for this strange form.  A few years later, it was the trend. Well, we all know the 60's had quite an impact on people.  He told me the whole story of how the hippie movement went from innocent expression to sheer degeneration in just a few short years.  He pulled himself back together and left the adventures of the 60's some time in the 80's.  Leaving this trip he returned to his yoga and meditation and lead quite an exemplary life.  He was so compassionate and could not stand to see people suffer, especially young people who were falling into the same traps that he fell into.  He reminded me of "The Catcher in the Rye."

Sometimes, I saw him as a father figure when he expressed his lived wisdom.  I realized that people like him were spiritual soldiers who had stormed hell, learned some valuable lessons, and then returned to tell the rest of us how NOT to make those very same mistakes.  Other times I saw him as a big brother but sometimes he treated me as the big brother.  He reminded me of my childhood friendships.

He and I were the non-monastic residents in the community.  We used to pull the engines out of the cars that the monks destroyed and replace them with new ones.  I wasn't a mechanic but I somehow understood these things.  Some crazy monk would overheat an engine and we would replace it in a few days.  A week later, another crazy monk somehow destroyed the new motor.  In the end, all we could do was laugh.  

I was still very young and only remained in the community for a few years.  The community had passed through a great trauma.  One of the monastic leaders, Shamitananda, tried to murder a nun with cobra venom. Shamitananda had stolen 60 thousand dollars from our community and then he left.  He created division in people's mind and successfully created a parallel and rather perverse movement. It was soon after this that he tried to murder his unrequited love with cobra venom.  He pursued the nun like a psychopath, before catching up with her in India where he gave her the mango yogurt drink laced with cobra venom.  To this day, he still influences people as the grand-daddy spiritual leader, even they know he is an attempted murderer.  My friend was very close to the Shamitananda and suffered this fragmentation of the community and the dissolution of his spiritual family.  We discussed how Shamitanda was totally out of line as a monastic and also mentally imbalanced.  We agreed but Dharma was still very attached to this monastic leader.   He told me he was afraid he would start drinking again.  He didn't return to alcohol, but he had chronic back pain and became addicted to some powerful narcotic pain medication.  This was so painful for me to see but there was nothing I could do as I hardly ever saw him any longer because I left the community.

Years later he hung himself.  I remembered how we once went rafting down the Colorado and I was amazed to see that he was a little shaken up by being in the solitude of the mountains for several days.  As if he were a small child, he wanted to sleep with me in my tent.  That is how I felt him after he died.  I felt him so close to me.  He became a part of me.  I began to live his sorrows as well as his joy.  As time went on there was only joy but I knew there was still something about him that I needed to see.

I had just turned 40 and was passing through some very deep meditations.  My only desire was to unify with the Supreme Consciousness.  I contemplated if it was time to leave my body through meditation.  I recalled how Shamitananda´s friends once tried to say I was a very special person with so many spiritual qualities.  They said I would do great things as a monk working in their mission.  I was about 23 at this time.  Later, after declaring I was not their poster-boy and did not want to be a monk, they said I would die because of my intense kundalini experiences very soon, definitely before I was 40.  I had just turned 40 and was laughing at this because I was thinking I would leave my body in bliss, not in some kind of illness created by a kundalini imbalance.  I was living alone on a mountain in Chiapas and each day I meditated I saw my end getting closer and closer.  There was no despair nor any desire to escape life.  On the contrary, my life was just too full of eternity, too full of the eternal Om calling me home.  

One day I stopped breathing for a very long time.  I felt the kurma nadii in the Vishuddha, throat chakra become really tight.  The kundalini had risen to the vishudda but could not go back down from there.  My breath had stopped but I was perfectly calm and only thought that if I don't breath, then I will soon leave my body.  Yet I felt such bliss that I did not care the least about this.  I felt the tension in my neck grow more and more intense.  It was impossible to breathe.  All of the sudden I feel the presence of my old friend and saw his last moments in life when he hung himself.  It was as if I had hung myself.  I was aware of the irony- the tension in my neck, no breath and near death, a spiritual parallel to suicide.  I was going to die in joy but my friend had died in despair.  From that state of near death I could see what Dharma saw, the "bardos" or dimensions where souls travel after departing from this world.  I recalled how my friend had seen life a little deeper than the rest and was actually a hero.  I saw him as a soldier who was storming hell once again and that the knowledge he brought me was so very useful.  I later began to see the other friends and family who had departed this world in a circle of light, just like people report in near death experiences.  However, I was perfectly conscious and still in my meditation.

I felt these ancestors desire to continue living through me but I questioned how this was possible because I could see myself passing from this world.  Then I saw them as rays of light forcing themselves back down, opening the Vishuddha chakra and entering my chest with the sound "ka", the sound that controls the propensity of hope.  Without a hopeful vision one cannot live well in this world, but in eternity even hope isn't necessary as all is complete and all hopes are fulfilled.  In this state of "death" I received a new and optimistic vision for the future with some new activities that would bind me for a while.  I began to breathe again and gradually came out of meditation.  A friend's baby crawled over to me and repeated the sound "ka."  

I returned to the ranch in the desert with my retinue where a great socio-political drama started and I became a <a href="https://williamenck.github.io/a-requiem/">quixotic narco slayer.</a> 

an excerpt from ["Form And Formless"](https://williamenck.github.io/form-and-formless/) 
